Add Generative and Discriminative Modeling section (#448)
dwavesystems/dwave-ocean-sdk: docs/quantum_research/stating_problems.rst

    "weak" predictors in such a way as to produce a more powerful, "strong"
    predictor.

Generative and Discriminative Modeling
--------------------------------------

*Generative* modeling is concerned with modeling the joint distribution of

> random variables :math:`X, Y`, whereas *discriminative* modeling is concerned

Reviewer: Do we need a reference for definitions of generative/discriminative modelling?
```
@book{bishop2006pattern,
  title={Pattern recognition and machine learning},
  author={Bishop, Christopher M and Nasrabadi, Nasser M},
  volume={4},
  number={4},
  year={2006},
  publisher={Springer}
}
```
or wikipedia is more practical https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discriminative_model#Contrast_with_generative_model

with the conditional distribution of :math:`X \mid Y`.

Generative modeling with annealing quantum computers is modeled by Boltzmann
machines and quantum Boltzmann machines [Ami2018]_, [Ack1985]_---families of
learnable probability models over binary data.\ [#]_

Discriminative modeling with annealing quantum computers can be modeled using
both Boltzmann machines and quantum neural networks [Kak1995]_, [Chr1995]_.

.. [#]
    Closely related to Boltzmann machines are the exponential family [Wai2008]_

>     Markov random fields [Dob1968]_ and Ising models [Isi1925]_.

Reviewer: commas and oxford comma(?)

.. _boltzmann_machines_quantum_generalization:

Boltzmann Machines: Quantum Generalization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Boltzmann machines model high-dimensional binary data. A Boltzmann machine is
defined by its probability mass function,

.. math::

    \begin{align}
        P_\theta(x) &= \frac{1}{Z(\theta)}\exp\{\langle T(x) ,
            \theta \rangle \} \\
        Z(\theta) & = \sum_{s \in \{\pm 1\} ^n}\exp\{\langle T(s) ,
            \theta \rangle \},
    \end{align}

where :math:`x \in \{\pm 1\}^n` for some dimension
:math:`n`, :math:`\theta \in \mathbb{R}^{n+n(n-1)/2}` are the model parameters,
and :math:`T: \{\pm 1\}^n \mapsto \{\pm 1\}^{n+n(n-1)/2}` is the sufficient
statistic [Wai2008]_ of the model; i.e.,

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
        T(x) = \begin{bmatrix}
            x_1 & x_2 & \dots & x_n & x_1x_2 & x_1 x_3 & \dots & x_2 x_3 &
            \dots & x_{n-1} x_n
        \end{bmatrix}^\intercal.
    \end{equation}

> More generally, given a graph :math:`G=(V, E)`, you can define a

Reviewer: "you" sounds a bit strange here and in other occurrences

Author: Science papers usually use plural first person but technical docs use second person

Hamiltonian, a nudge Hamiltonian, defined as

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
        H_\text{nudge}(x, y) = H(x) - \sum_i \tilde h_i(y) Z_i,
    \end{equation}

where :math:`y \in \mathbb{R}^{d_2}` are the desired network outputs, and
:math:`\tilde h_i` is similarly defined to :math:`h`,
:math:`\tilde h_i: \mathbb{R}^d \mapsto \mathbb{R}`. The gradient is expressed
as

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
        \nabla_\theta C(\theta, (x, y)) = \mathbb{E}_S[T(S)] -
        \mathbb{E}_{S'}[T(S')],
    \end{equation}

where :math:`S, S'` are spin-valued random vectors with distribution prescribed
by :math:`H(x), H_\text{nudge}(x, y)` respectively, :math:`\theta = (h, J)` (as
defined in the :ref:`boltzmann_machines_quantum_generalization` section),
:math:`T` is the sufficient statistic of :math:`H` (as defined in the
same section), and
:math:`C: \mathbb{R}^{|V| + |E|} \times \mathbb{R}^d \times \mathbb{R}^{d_2} \mapsto \mathbb{R}`
is a differentiable cost function (with respect to the first argument).
The gradient, expressed as a difference of expectations, can be readily
estimated by sampling from a quantum computer.

> An inefficiency of the approach is the need to sample from two separate

Reviewer: Let's get rid of this sentence. It was more relevant in the original context.

Flash attention [Dao2022]_---a hardware-optimized attention module---reported
runtimes of :math:`1`\--\ :math:`10`\ s of milliseconds (including
backpropagation) for inputs of length ranging from :math:`1000`\ s to
:math:`8000`\ s. If, however, one insists on sampling from the quantum neural
network via, say, classical simulations and approximations, then annealing
quantum computers are likely to perform favorably.

While restricted Boltzmann machines are universal approximators [Ler2008]_,
[Mon2020]_, D-Wave's annealing quantum computers are implemented with sparse
connectivity and are thus limited in their expressivity.
The |dwave_5kq_tm| system and |adv2_tm| system's topologies are defined by the
:term:`Pegasus` and :term:`Zephyr` family of graphs respectively [Boo2019]_,
[Boo2021]_. Each vertex represents a qubit, and each edge represents a coupler.
In other words, these graphs are used to define graph-restricted Boltzmann
machines described in the :ref:`boltzmann_machines_quantum_generalization`
section.

The two families of graphs are visualized in the :ref:`qpu_topologies` section.
A key observation relevant to the discussion of expressivity is the locality of

> interactions. In both family of graphs, edges are locally connected in a

Reviewer: "both" family of graphs is ambiguous now that the reference points to `:ref:qpu_topologies`

    "weak" predictors in such a way as to produce a more powerful, "strong"
    predictor.

Generative and Discriminative Modeling
--------------------------------------

`Generative <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discriminative_model#Contrast_with_generative_model>`_
modeling is concerned with modeling the joint distribution of random variables
:math:`X, Y`, whereas
`discriminative <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discriminative_model>`_
modeling is concerned with the conditional distribution of :math:`X \mid Y`.

> Generative modeling with annealing quantum computers is modeled by Boltzmann

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generative modeling with annealing quantum computers can be modeled by Boltzmann
```

machines and quantum Boltzmann machines [Ami2018]_, [Ack1985]_---families of
learnable probability models over binary data.\ [#]_

Discriminative modeling with annealing quantum computers can be modeled using
both Boltzmann machines and quantum neural networks [Kak1995]_, [Chr1995]_.

.. [#]
    Closely related to Boltzmann machines are the
    `exponential family <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_family>`_
    [Wai2008]_,
    `Markov random fields <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markov_random_field>`_
    [Dob1968]_, and :term:`Ising` models [Isi1925]_.

> .. _boltzmann_machines_quantum_generalization:

Reviewer: This section overlaps with the [Boltzmann Distribution](https://output.circle-artifacts.com/output/job/e975c430-5f58-47fb-b106-f981d67b6be5/artifacts/0/docs/_build/html/quantum_research/stating_problems.html#boltzmann-distribution) section. Might need some massaging to make them coherent/consistent. Alternatively, note the difference in notation for ease of exposition

Author: yes, please see [this comment](https://github.com/dwavesystems/dwave-ocean-sdk/pull/448#issue-4305440198)

Reviewer: Ops lol thx

difficult as the
`quadratic assignment problem <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quadratic_assignment_problem>`_
[Law1963]_---an NP-hard problem. The problem can be formulated as maximizing the
likelihood function over both mappings and parameters.

Both challenges can be addressed via several approaches.
One solution is to leverage variants of (variational) autoencoders [Sch2015]_,
[Bal1987]_, [Kin2013]_, for example, [Rol2016]_, [Li2016]_, [Zha2017]_,
[Van2017]_, [Jan2016]_, [Kho2018]_.
The idea underpinning these approaches is to enforce a discrete-latent-space
constraint in the model.

Defining variational autoencoders [Kin2013]_ with discrete latent variables is
not a problem because the reparameterization trick [Kin2013]_ is not limited to
real-valued random variables [Rol2016]_.
However, a problem arises in training such a discrete model via gradient
descent: gradients are zero for discrete random variables. [Rol2016]_ addresses
this training problem by augmenting binary latent variables with real-valued
random variables. The auxiliary variables are equipped with distributions
conditioned on the binary variables, resulting in nonzero gradients in

> backpropagation [Sch2015]_.

Reviewer: ops, missed a wiki-suitable reference https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backpropagation

For example, consider the random variable :math:`Z \mid B` where :math:`B` is a
Bernoulli random variable and :math:`Z \mid B = 0` is :math:`0`, and
:math:`Z \mid B = 1 \sim \text{Exponential}(1)`.

> Using the inverse conditional distribution function (CDF) sampling method

Reviewer: Missing inverse CDF wiki reference

[Rob2004]_, you have,

.. math::

    \begin{align}
        u & \sim \text{Uniform}(0, 1) \\
        x & \in [0, 1] \\
        f(x, u) & = \begin{cases}
                        0  & u > x \\
                        \log \left[ \frac{u+x-1}{x}(e-1) +1	\right] & u \leq x
                    \end{cases},
    \end{align}

where :math:`u` is the *noise variable*, :math:`x` is the encoded data input,
and the second case for :math:`f` comes from the

> `inverse CDF <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverse_transform_sampling>`_

Reviewer: Ah I guess it's here---I suggest moving it up to first occurrence

Flash attention [Dao2022]_---a hardware-optimized attention module---reported
runtimes of :math:`1`\--\ :math:`10`\ s of milliseconds (including
backpropagation) for inputs of length ranging from :math:`1000`\ s to
:math:`8000`\ s. If, however, one insists on sampling from the quantum neural
network via, say, classical simulations and approximations, then annealing
quantum computers are likely to perform favorably.

While restricted Boltzmann machines are universal approximators [Ler2008]_,
[Mon2020]_, D-Wave's annealing quantum computers are implemented with sparse
connectivity and are thus limited in their expressivity.
The |dwave_5kq_tm| system and |adv2_tm| system's topologies are defined by the
:term:`Pegasus` and :term:`Zephyr` family of graphs respectively [Boo2019]_,
[Boo2021]_. Each vertex represents a qubit, and each edge represents a coupler.
In other words, these graphs are used to define graph-restricted Boltzmann
machines described in the :ref:`boltzmann_machines_quantum_generalization`
section.

The two families of graphs are visualized in the :ref:`qpu_topologies` section.
A key observation relevant to the discussion of expressivity is the locality of

> interactions: edges are locally connected in a two-dimensional plane and

Reviewer 2: I would word it differently because locally they are not 2D (planar), there are native k4s. But globaly they are 2D-like (graph size grows as R^2).

interactions: edges are connected in a quasi-2D lattice and long-range interactiond do not exist

    "weak" predictors in such a way as to produce a more powerful, "strong"
    predictor.

Generative and Discriminative Modeling
--------------------------------------

> *Generative* modeling is concerned with the modeling the joint distribution of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Generative* modeling is concerned with modeling the joint distribution of
```

random variables :math:`X, Y`, whereas *discriminative* modeling is concerned
with the conditional distribution of :math:`X \mid Y`.

Generative modeling with annealing quantum computers is modeled by Boltzmann
machines and quantum Boltzmann machines [Ami2018]_, [Ack1985]_---families of
learnable probability models over binary data.\ [#]_

Discriminative modeling with annealing quantum computers can be modeled using
both Boltzmann machines and quantum neural networks [Kak1995]_, [Chr1995]_.

.. [#]
    Closely related to Boltzmann machines are the exponential family [Wai2008]_

>     Markov random fields [Dob1968]_, and Ising models [Isi1925]_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Markov random fields [Dob1968]_ and Ising models [Isi1925]_.
```

.. _boltzmann_machines_quantum_generalization:

Boltzmann Machines: Quantum Generalization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Boltzmann machines model high-dimensional binary data. A Boltzmann machine is
defined by its probability mass function,

.. math::

    \begin{align}
        P_\theta(x) &= \frac{1}{Z(\theta)}\exp\{\langle T(x) ,
            \theta \rangle \} \\
        Z(\theta) & = \sum_{s \in \{\pm 1\} ^n}\exp\{\langle T(s) ,
            \theta \rangle \},
    \end{align}

where :math:`x \in \{\pm 1\}^n` for some dimension
:math:`n`, :math:`\theta \in \mathbb{R}^{n+n(n-1)/2}` are the model parameters,
and :math:`T: \{\pm 1\}^n \mapsto \{\pm 1\}^{n+n(n-1)/2}` is the sufficient
statistic [Wai2008]_ of the model; i.e.,

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
        T(x) = \begin{bmatrix}
            x_1 & x_2 & \dots & x_n & x_1x_2 & x_1 x_3 & \dots & x_2 x_3 &
            \dots & x_{n-1} x_n
        \end{bmatrix}^\intercal.
    \end{equation}

> More generally, given a graph :math:`G=(V, E)`, define a graph-restricted

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
More generally, given a graph :math:`G=(V, E)`, one can define a graph-restricted
```

Boltzmann machine specified by :math:`G` to have sufficient statistics defined
by,

.. math::

    \begin{align}
        T(x) & =
        \begin{bmatrix}
            x_{v_1} & \dots & x_{n} & z_{e_1} & \dots & z_{e_m},
        \end{bmatrix}^\intercal,
    \end{align}

where :math:`v_i \in V` for :math:`i \in \{1, \dots, \lvert V\rvert\}`,

> and :math:`z_{e_i} = x_{e_{i_1}}x_{e_{i_2}}`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:math:`z_{e_i} = x_{e_{i_1}}x_{e_{i_2}}`,
```

Author: It's better to separate for construct otherwise it will be parsed as v in V for conditions on i, z, ... etc

:math:`e_i = (e_{i_1}, e_{i_2}) \in E` for
:math:`i \in \{1, \dots, \lvert E \rvert \}`, and
:math:`\theta \in \mathbb{R}^{\lvert V \rvert + \lvert E \rvert}`.

When only a subset of variables are observed, denoted :math:`v`, the remaining
unobserved variables are referred to as *hidden units* :math:`h`.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

The marginal distribution of observed variables can be far more expressive due
to the marginalization of hidden units; i.e.,

.. math::

    \begin{align}
        P_\theta^\text{m}(v) & = \sum_{h} P_\theta(x=(v, h)).
    \end{align}

The inclusion of hidden units can potentially introduce challenges to be
discussed in the :ref:`generative_discriminative_conclusion` section.

Given a binary dataset, one can fit a Boltzmann machine to the model using, for
example, maximum likelihood estimates [Cas2002]_.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

However, the maximum likelihood estimate for a Boltzmann machine is nontrivial
to evaluate. The standard approach [Hin2002]_, [Ack1985]_ is to optimize the
model using stochastic gradient descent [Boy2004]_.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

The gradient of the log likelihood function itself is intractable:

.. math::

    \begin{align}
        \nabla_\theta \log P_\theta(v) & = T(v) - \mathbb{E}\left[ T(X)\right].
    \end{align}

Its intractability stems from the expectation term, with respect to the model,
which requires an evaluation of the partition function :math:`Z(\theta)`.
This motivates the need for Monte Carlo algorithms [Rob2004]_; i.e., sample
approximations of the expectation.

Sampling from Boltzmann machines is notoriously difficult and is where the
annealing quantum computer excels.

The restricted Boltzmann machine [Hin2002]_, [Smo1986]_ is a special case of the
graph-restricted Boltzmann machine in which the graph is a complete bipartite
graph. Furthermore, partial observations are restricted to be on one and only
one partite set of the graph. These modeling constraints were motivated by the
need for an efficient training algorithm [Hin2002]_, [Hin2010]_.

Quantum Boltzmann machines offer a generalization of Boltzmann machines and are
defined by Hamiltonians.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Author: This seems a good stand-alone sentence

> In practice today (2026, the time of writing), at D-Wave the annealing quantum

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In 2026, the D-Wave annealing quantum
```

> computer is utilized as an approximate sampler of quantum Boltzmann machines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
computer was utilized as an approximate sampler of quantum Boltzmann machines,
```

> Thus the following introductory definition only serves to satisfy one's

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
as described in the rest of this section in an introductory fashion
```

> curiosity: Refer to [Ami2018]_ for a complete treatment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(for a complete treatment, see [Ami2018]_).
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> In D-Wave's implementation, these Hamiltonians take the form:\ [#]_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In D-Wave's implementation, the Hamiltonians that define said quantum Boltzmann machines take the form:\ [#]_
```

.. math::

    \begin{align}
        H   & = \sum_{i \in V} h_i Z_i + \sum_{(i, j)\in E} J_{i,j} Z_i Z_j +
                \sum_{i\in V} \gamma_i X_i \\
        Z_i & = \left( \bigotimes_{j=1}^{j=i-1} I_2 \right)
                Z \left( \bigotimes_{j=i+1}^{j=\lvert V \rvert} I_2 \right) \\
        X_i & = \left( \bigotimes_{j=1}^{j=i-1} I_2 \right)
                X \left( \bigotimes_{j=i+1}^{j=\lvert V \rvert} I_2 \right) \\
        I_2 & = \begin{bmatrix}
                    1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1
                \end{bmatrix} \\
        X   & = \begin{bmatrix}
                    0 & 1 \\ -1 & 0
                \end{bmatrix} \\
        Z   & = \begin{bmatrix}
                    1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1

>                 \end{bmatrix}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                \end{bmatrix},
```

    \end{align}

> The product :math:`\bigotimes` denotes the Kronecker product [Str2012]_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
where the product :math:`\bigotimes` denotes the Kronecker product [Str2012]_.
```

The probability measure is now defined by the diagonal elements of the density
matrix,

.. math::

    \begin{align}
        \rho & = \frac{1}{\mathcal{Z}}\exp\{-H\} \\
        \mathcal{Z} & = \Tr\left[\exp\{-H\}\right].
    \end{align}

> For intuition, consider a diagonal Hamiltonian---diagonal Hamiltonian

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To gain an intuitive understanding, consider a diagonal Hamiltonian---diagonal Hamiltonian
```

(:math:`\gamma_i = 0` for all :math:`i`) corresponds to the classical definition of a
Boltzmann machine. By construction of the Hamiltonian, the summation over
:math:`Z_i` and :math:`Z_iZ_j` matrices result in a matrix whose diagonal
entries correspond to each of the :math:`2^{\lvert V\rvert}` binary strings'
probability (when normalized).

> When qubits are measured in the :math:`z`-basis, or with respect to each

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When qubits are measured in the :math:`z`-basis or with respect to each
```

Author: I read this as a depend clause

:math:`Z_i`, binary strings are observed with their corresponding probabilities.
The quantum Boltzmann machine can be trained using the same expressions or

> quantities as in classical Boltzmann machines, albeit based on a lower bound of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
quantities in classical Boltzmann machines, albeit based on a lower bound of
```

the log likelihood [Ami2018]_.

.. [#]

>     The Hamiltonian is time-dependent but, motivated by ease of exposition, the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For clarity, the dependence on time has been omitted,
```

>     dependence on time has been omitted here. For a more complete treatment,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    even though the Hamiltonian is time-dependent. For a more complete treatment,
```

>     see, for example, the :ref:`qpu_quantum_annealing_intro` section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    see the :ref:`qpu_quantum_annealing_intro` section.
```

One solution is to leverage variants of (variational) autoencoders [Sch2015]_,
[Bal1987]_, [Kin2013]_, for example, [Rol2016]_, [Li2016]_, [Zha2017]_,
[Van2017]_, [Jan2016]_, [Kho2018]_.
The idea underpinning these approaches is to enforce a discrete-latent-space
constraint in the model.

Defining variational autoencoders [Kin2013]_ with discrete latent variables is
not a problem because the reparameterization trick [Kin2013]_ is not limited to
real-valued random variables [Rol2016]_.
However, a problem arises in training such a discrete model via gradient
descent: gradients are zero for discrete random variables. [Rol2016]_ addresses
this training problem by augmenting binary latent variables with real-valued
random variables. The auxiliary variables are equipped with distributions
conditioned on the binary variables, resulting in nonzero gradients in
backpropagation [Sch2015]_.

For example, consider the random variable :math:`Z \mid B` where :math:`B` is a
Bernoulli random variable and :math:`Z \mid B = 0` is :math:`0`, and
:math:`Z \mid B = 1 \sim \text{Exponential}(1)`.

Using the inverse conditional distribution function (CDF) sampling method

> [Rob2004]_, you have,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Rob2004]_, we have,
```

Author: Our docs use 2nd person

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
        L_\text{quant}(z) = \lvert \lvert z - \text{sign}(z)\rvert \rvert ^2.
    \end{equation}

Finally, *REINFORCE* [Wil1992]_, [Gly1990]_ can also be used to backpropagate
gradients through discretization layers,

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
        \nabla_x \mathbb{E}_Z[f(Z)] = \mathbb{E}_Z[f(Z)\nabla_x \log p_x(Z)].
    \end{equation}

A drawback of REINFORCE is that the estimator is effectively computed by
expressions akin to finite differences, resulting in high variance. Bespoke
variance-reduction techniques [Rob2004]_ are often required to stabilize the
estimator. See [Jan2016]_ for a summary of relevant variance-reduction
techniques based on control variates.

Boltzmann machines can also be used as discriminative models or, equivalently,
used for modeling conditional distributions :math:`Y \mid X`. See [Cal2019]_
for an applied example using annealing quantum computers. Training of Boltzmann
machines for discriminative tasks is no different from training generative
models. Variables :math:`X` and :math:`Y` are both assigned to variables of a
Boltzmann machine during training.\ [#]_

> At inference, however, only variables associated with :math:`X` are fixed at

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, by inference, only variables associated with :math:`X` are fixed at
```

Author: "Inference" here refers to a phase of ML, not to a deduction on our part

their observed value and predictions are computed by sampling :math:`Y\mid X`.
In practice, discriminative modeling with sparse graph-restricted Boltzmann

> machines poses a subtle variable-assignment problem to be discussed in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
machines poses a subtle variable-assignment problem, which is discussed in the
```

:ref:`generative_discriminative_conclusion` section.

.. [#]
    This assignment or mapping of variables can be performed via an encoder or

>     by manual assignment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    manual assignment.
```

Author: "by manual assignment" is more natural than "via manual assignment"

Quantum Neural Networks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Quantum neural networks [Kak1995]_, [Chr1995]_ are families of functions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Quantum neural networks ([Kak1995]_, [Chr1995]_) are families of functions
```

evaluated via parameterized quantum systems.\ [#]_

> That is, a quantum neural network, :math:`f_\theta`, parameterized by

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That is, a quantum neural network :math:`f_\theta` parameterized by
```

Author: A dependent clause is a nice pause here

> :math:`\theta` is defined as,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:math:`\theta` is defined as
```

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
        f_\theta(x) = \langle \psi_0 \lvert U^\dagger_\theta(x) \hat F
            U_\theta(x) \rvert \psi_0 \rangle,
    \end{equation}

where :math:`x \in \mathbb{R}^d` represents input data, :math:`U_\theta`
represents a unitary transformation, :math:`U_\theta^\dagger` its conjugate
transpose, :math:`\lvert \psi_0 \rangle` is an initial state of the system,
:math:`\langle \psi_0 \rvert` its conjugate transpose, and :math:`\hat F` is a
quantum observable.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Essentially, a quantum neural network is a parameterized function whose outputs
are expected values of the quantum system. A difficulty in applying quantum
neural networks to real-world applications is in training.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Evaluating or even approximating gradients of a loss function with respect to
the network parameters is nontrivial due to the intractability of densities and
expectations. Much of the literature on training quantum neural networks has
been dedicated to gate-model systems, using, for example, the parameter-shift
rule and its generalizations [Mit2018]_, [Wie2022]_.

A more relevant approach to training quantum annealing-based neural networks is
via equilibrium propagation [Sce2017]_, a gradient-estimation technique
originally introduced in the context of training energy-based models [Teh2003]_.
Generalizations to quantum equilibrium propagation have been proposed in

> [Mas2025]_, [Sce2024]_. The parameter update rule can be described as follows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Mas2025]_, [Sce2024]_.
```

Author: @kevinchern, do we use "parameter update rule" as a synonym of "parameter-shift rule"?

Reviewer: No, they are not synonymous. "Parameter update rule" is intended to describe "the rule for updating parameter values" while "parameter-shift rule" is the name of a method.

Reviewer: Probably best rephrase it to avoid such a misinterpretation

> Consider an example Hamiltonian of the form,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The parameter-shift rule can be described as follows. Consider an example Hamiltonian of the form,
```

Reviewer: See [thread](https://github.com/dwavesystems/dwave-ocean-sdk/pull/448/changes#r3120820031)

Author: Yes, this is why I did not implement @qwriter's suggested edit, and will now resolve this comment, thanks.

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
        H(x) = \sum_{i, j} J_{i,j}(x) Z_iZ_j + \sum_i h_i(x) Z_i,
    \end{equation}

where :math:`Z_i` are as defined in the
:ref:`boltzmann_machines_quantum_generalization` section, :math:`J_{i,j}, h_i`

> are scalar functions of the input data :math:`x`; that is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
are scalar functions of the input data :math:`x`; that is,
```

:math:`h_i: \mathbb{R}^d \mapsto \mathbb{R}` and

> :math:`J_{i, j}:\mathbb{R}^d \mapsto \mathbb{R}`. Note, :math:`h_i` and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:math:`J_{i, j}:\mathbb{R}^d \mapsto \mathbb{R}`. Note :math:`h_i` and
```

:math:`J_{i, j}` include constant functions independent of :math:`x`.
Equilibrium propagation approximates the gradients by introducing another

> Hamiltonian, a nudge Hamiltonian, defined as,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Hamiltonian, a nudge Hamiltonian, defined as
```

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
        H_\text{nudge}(x, y) = H(x) - \sum_i \tilde h_i(y) Z_i,
    \end{equation}

where :math:`y \in \mathbb{R}^{d_2}` are the desired network outputs, and
:math:`\tilde h_i` is similarly defined to :math:`h`,
:math:`\tilde h_i: \mathbb{R}^d \mapsto \mathbb{R}`. The gradient is expressed

> as,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
as
```

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
        \nabla_\theta C(\theta, (x, y)) = \mathbb{E}_S[T(S)] -
        \mathbb{E}_{S'}[T(S')],
    \end{equation}

> where :math:`S, S'` are spin-valued random vectors with distribution prescribed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
where :math:`S, S'` are spin-valued random vectors with a distribution prescribed
```

by :math:`H(x), H_\text{nudge}(x, y)` respectively, :math:`\theta = (h, J)` (as
defined in the :ref:`boltzmann_machines_quantum_generalization` section),
:math:`T` is the sufficient statistic of :math:`H` (as defined in the
same section), and
:math:`C: \mathbb{R}^{|V| + |E|} \times \mathbb{R}^d \times \mathbb{R}^{d_2} \mapsto \mathbb{R}`
is a differentiable cost function (with respect to the first argument).
The gradient, expressed as a difference of expectations, can be readily
estimated by sampling from a quantum computer.

> An inefficiency of the approach is the need to sample from two separate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One inefficiency of the parameter-shift-rule approach is the need to sample from two separate
```

Reviewer: See [thread](https://github.com/dwavesystems/dwave-ocean-sdk/pull/448/changes#r3120820031)

distributions for one gradient computation.

The applicability of quantum annealing-based neural networks has been
demonstrated in MNIST [Den2012]_ image classification tasks [Zha2025]_,
[Lay2024]_. Notably, [Lay2024]_ exploited the hardware topology of quantum
annealers [Boo2019]_, [Boo2021]_ to implement a convolutional neural network
[Fuk1979]_, [Sch2015]_.

> A closely related approach is quantum reservoir computing [Kor2024]_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another closely related approach is quantum reservoir computing [Kor2024]_.
```

> Informally but practically, quantum reservoir computing equates to evaluating an

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An informal yet practical explanation of quantum reservoir computing is that it equates to evaluating an
```

untrained quantum neural network, as an activation function, followed by a

> trained linear function. The difficulty in applying quantum reservoirs is the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
trained linear function. The difficulty in applying quantum reservoirs is that it
```

> domain-expertise required in defining a base Hamiltonian and a mapping of inputs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
requires domain-expertise to define a base Hamiltonian and a mapping of inputs
```

to the base Hamiltonian.

.. [#]
    "Quantum neural networks" are often used synonymously with "variational quantum circuits" or
    "parameterized quantum circuits".

.. _generative_discriminative_conclusion:

Opportunities and Limitations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Boltzmann machines and quantum neural networks provide powerful frameworks for
generative and discriminative modeling using annealing quantum computers.
Naturally, these models can be readily inserted

> into---or substitute for---subcomponents of existing models: for example,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
into---or substitute for---subcomponents of existing models, such as
```

> linear layers, activation functions, and attention modules. Thus there is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
linear layers, activation functions, and attention modules. Thus, there is
```

interest in identifying areas for which practical benefits can be realized with
quantum annealing-based machine learning methods.

> This section considers three performance indicators in which a annealing quantum

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section considers three performance indicators in which an annealing quantum
```

computer has potential to improve upon classical baselines.

1)  Runtime
2)  Model complexity
3)  Power consumption

> First, a description of timing information of D-Wave's annealing quantum

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, we provide a description of timing information of D-Wave's annealing quantum
```

computers at a coarsened but practically relevant granularity.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Quantum annealing protocols can operate in time spans as short as nanoseconds to
as long as milliseconds. Once the protocol has run its course, reading out the
classical states takes on the order of hundreds of microseconds. The bottleneck
in this protocol is in programming the Hamiltonian to the annealing quantum
computer, which is on the order of tens of milliseconds.

Because D-Wave's annealing quantum computers are accessed via |cloud_tm|_, a
quantum cloud platform, there may be additional network latencies in the order
of hundreds of milliseconds. In principle, communication latency can be
mitigated and programming time optimized such that the effective processing time
is on the order of tens of milliseconds.

> A comprehensive breakdown of timing information is in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A comprehensive breakdown of timing information is described in the
```

:ref:`qpu_operation_timing` section.

> To put this timing into context, consider both generative and discriminative

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To put this timing in context, consider both generative and discriminative
```

modeling tasks.

> In a generative model setup where annealing quantum computers are utilized as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a generative model setup, it is natural to compare annealing quantum computers used as
```

> Boltzmann machine samplers, the natural comparators are Monte Carlo samplers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Boltzmann machine samplers to Monte Carlo samplers
```

runtimes of :math:`1`\--\ :math:`10`\ s of milliseconds (including
backpropagation) for inputs of length ranging from :math:`1000`\ s to
:math:`8000`\ s. If, however, one insists on sampling from the quantum neural
network via, say, classical simulations and approximations, then annealing
quantum computers are likely to perform favorably.

While restricted Boltzmann machines are universal approximators [Ler2008]_,
[Mon2020]_, D-Wave's annealing quantum computers are implemented with sparse
connectivity and are thus limited in their expressivity.
The |dwave_5kq_tm| system and |adv2_tm| system's topologies are defined by the
:term:`Pegasus` and :term:`Zephyr` family of graphs respectively [Boo2019]_,
[Boo2021]_. Each vertex represents a qubit, and each edge represents a coupler.
In other words, these graphs are used to define graph-restricted Boltzmann
machines described in the :ref:`boltzmann_machines_quantum_generalization`
section.

The two families of graphs are visualized in the :ref:`qpu_topologies` section.
A key observation relevant to the discussion of expressivity is the locality of
interactions. In both family of graphs, edges are locally connected in a

> two-dimensional plane; long range interactions do not exist. These locality

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
two-dimensional plane and long-range interactions do not exist. These locality
```

constraints motivate techniques for maximizing expressivity, which are discussed
next.

Several approaches exist to increase model expressivity.

1)  Minor embeddings [Cho2008]_: represent logical variables by chaining
    multiple physical qubits through strong pairwise interaction terms.
2)  Hidden units: marginalize a distribution over its hidden units.

> 3)  Optimize variable-to-qubit mappings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3)  Optimization of variable-to-qubit mappings.
```

> Minor embedding can increase connectivity and introduce long-range interactions,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Minor embedding can increase connectivity and introduce long-range interactions
```

but introduces its own challenges such as early freezeout and chain
breakages.\ [#]_

Hidden units can be interpreted similarly to embeddings where the embeddings are
learned implicitly. However, this also introduces complexity to training
methods. For example, when using tractable closed-form expressions for
marginalization, the effective inverse temperature must be estimated [Ray2016]_.
When using sample approximations for marginalization, multiple invocations of
the annealing quantum computer will be required.

The competitive runtime and model expressivity is further complemented by a
constant power consumption [Dwave8]_ independent of model complexity.

> This constant power consumption is because almost all power drawn from D-Wave's

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This constant power consumption results because almost all power drawn from D-Wave's
```

> systems goes toward cryogenic refrigeration; the bulk of the computation is

Reviewer 3: What does "the bulk of the computation is analog" have to do with power consumption?

Author: I assume it's an implicit comparison of the lower power consumption possible in analog circuits, especially superconducting circuits, to the higher power consumption of the digital circuits used in classical computing.
@kevinchern, do you want to add anything here?

Reviewer: Nothing to add, thanks.
